Penetration enhancers☆
Adrian C. Williams ⁎, Brian W. Barry
Drug Delivery Group, School of Pharmacy, University of Bradford, Richmond Road, Bradford, West Yorkshire, BD7 1DP, UK
article info abstract
Article history:
Received 9 September 2003
Accepted 13 October 2003
Available online 13 September 2012
Keywords:
Penetration enhancers
Accelerants
Skin
Lipids
Azone
Dimethylsulphoxide
Terpenes
One long-standing approach for improving transdermal drug delivery uses penetration enhancers (also called
sorption promoters or accelerants) which penetrate into skin to reversibly decrease the barrier resistance. Numerous compounds have been evaluated for penetration enhancing activity, including sulphoxides (such as
dimethylsulphoxide, DMSO), Azones (e.g. laurocapram), pyrrolidones (for example 2-pyrrolidone, 2P), alcohols
and alkanols (ethanol, or decanol), glycols (for example propylene glycol, PG, a common excipient in topically
applied dosage forms), surfactants (also common in dosage forms) and terpenes. Many potential sites and
modes of action have been identified for skin penetration enhancers; the intercellular lipid matrix in which
the accelerants may disrupt the packing motif, the intracellular keratin domains or through increasing drug
partitioning into the tissue by acting as a solvent for the permeant within the membrane. Further potential mechanisms of action, for example with the enhancers acting on desmosomal connections between corneocytes or altering metabolic activity within the skin, or exerting an influence on the thermodynamic activity/solubility of the
drug in its vehicle are also feasible, and are also considered in this review.
© 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V.
Contents
1. Introduction ............................................................... 0
2. General principles ............................................................ 0
3. Penetration enhancers .......................................................... 0
3.1. Water ............................................................... 0
3.2. Sulphoxides and similar chemicals ................................................. 0
3.3. Azone ............................................................... 0
3.4. Pyrrolidones ........................................................... 0
3.5. Fatty acids ............................................................ 0
3.6. Alcohols, fatty alcohols and glycols ................................................. 0
3.7. Surfactants ............................................................ 0
3.8. Urea ............................................................... 0
3.9. Essential oils, terpenes and terpenoids ............................................... 0
3.10. Phospholipids ........................................................... 0
3.11. Solvents at high concentrations ................................................... 0
3.12. Metabolic interventions ...................................................... 0
4. General comments on penetration enhancers ............................................... 0
References .................................................................. 0
1. Introduction
Human skin is a remarkably efficient barrier, designed to keep “our
insides in and the outsides out”. This barrier property causes difficulties
for transdermal delivery of therapeutic agents. One long-standing approach to increase the range of drugs that can be effectively delivered
via this route has been to use penetration enhancers, chemicals that interact with skin constituents to promote drug flux. To-date, a vast array
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 64 (2012) 128–137
☆ PII of original article: S0169-409X(03)00241-2. The article was originally published
in Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 56 (2004) 603–618.
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 1274 23 4756; fax: +44 1274 23 3496.
E-mail address: A.C.Williams@bradford.ac.uk (A.C. Williams).
128
129
129
129
130
131
131
132
132
133
133
134
134
135
135
135
136
0169-409X/$ – see front matter © 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2012.09.032
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/addr
of chemicals has been evaluated as penetration enhancers (or absorption promoters), yet their inclusion into topical or transdermal formulations is limited since the underlying mechanisms of action of these
agents are seldom clearly defined. In this article we review some uses
of the more widely investigated chemical penetration enhancers and
discuss possible mechanisms of action.
2. General principles
Although many chemicals have been evaluated as penetration enhancers in human or animal skins, to-date none has proven to be
ideal. Some of the more desirable properties for penetration enhancers acting within skin have been given as [1];
• They should be non-toxic, non-irritating and non-allergenic.
• They would ideally work rapidly, and the activity and duration of
effect should be both predictable and reproducible.
• They should have no pharmacological activity within the body—i.e.
should not bind to receptor sites.
• The penetration enhancers should work unidirectionally, i.e. should
allow therapeutic agents into the body whilst preventing the loss of
endogenous material from the body.
• When removed from the skin, barrier properties should return both
rapidly and fully.
• The penetration enhancers should be appropriate for formulation
into diverse topical preparations, thus should be compatible with
both excipients and drugs.
• They should be cosmetically acceptable with an appropriate skin
‘feel’.
Not surprisingly, no such material has yet been discovered that
possesses the above ideal properties although some chemicals demonstrate several of the above attributes.
Penetration enhancers may be incorporated into formulations in
order to improve drug flux through diverse membranes including
gastric epithelia or nasal membranes. Diffusion through skin, controlled by the outer most layer, the stratum corneum, can be regarded
as diffusion through a passive membrane. The steady state flux ( J) of
a drug through skin can be approximated by Fick's second law of diffusion;
δC
δt ¼ Dδ
2
C
δx2 ð1Þ
where C is the concentration of the diffusing substance, x the space
co-ordinate measured normal to the section, D the diffusion coefficient, and t is time.
With skin permeation studies, investigators often use an in vitro
protocol with a membrane clamped between two compartments,
one of which contains a drug formulation (the donor) and the other
compartment holding a receptor solution which provides sink conditions (essentially zero concentration). With sufficient time, steady
state diffusion across the membrane prevails. Under these conditions
Eq. (1) may be simplified to;
dm
dt ¼ DC0
h ð2Þ
where m is the cumulative mass of permeant that passes per unit area
through the membrane in time t, C0 is the concentration of diffusant
in the first layer of the membrane at the skin surface contacting the
source of the penetrant, and h is the membrane thickness.
In most experimental protocols it is difficult to measure C0 but C0
′,
the concentration of diffusant in the donor phase, which bathes the
membrane, is usually known. C0 and C0
′ are related by;
C0 ¼ PC0
′ ð3Þ
where P is the partition coefficient of the diffusant between the membrane and bathing solution. Substituting Eq. (3) into Eq. (2) gives:
dm
dt ¼ DC0
′ P
h ð4Þ
From Eq. (4), the classic equation used to analyse skin permeation
data, it can be seen that the flux (dm/dt) is governed by the diffusion
coefficient of the drug in the stratum corneum, the dissolved effective
concentration of the drug in the vehicle, the partition coefficient between the formulation and the stratum corneum and the membrane
thickness. This equation thus illustrates some of the properties that
may be manipulated on application of a penetration enhancer to the
skin. Thus, an effective penetration enhancer may increase the diffusion coefficient of the drug in the stratum corneum (i.e. disrupt the
barrier nature of the stratum corneum), may act to increase the effective concentration of the drug in the vehicle (for example acting as an
anti-solvent), could improve partitioning between the formulation
and the stratum corneum (perhaps by altering the solvent nature of
the skin membrane to improve partitioning into the tissue) or, less
likely, by decreasing the skin thickness (perhaps by providing a permeation ‘shortcut’ as opposed to a tortuous pathway for a permeant).
The modes of action of penetration enhancers in general are complex. As will be seen below, at clinically acceptable concentrations,
most enhancers interact with the intercellular lipid domain of the
stratum corneum. Fig. 1 is a modification of a scheme proposed by
Menon and Lee [2] for the action of solvents on this tissue. However,
the diagram is useful for accelerants in general as a visual aid to much
of the discussion following below. Further consideration of penetration enhancer mechanisms of action is given in Section 4.
3. Penetration enhancers
The literature contains reports describing various elegant formulations that may contain materials which have penetration enhancing
activity. For example, vesicles are often prepared from phospholipids;
phospholipids themselves have some penetration enhancing activity
(see below). Likewise, penetration enhancers have been formulated
into eutectic systems or into slow or sustained release delivery systems. The focus of this chapter is not the formulations per se, rather
the penetration enhancing activity of these materials.
3.1. Water
One long-standing approach to improve transdermal and topical
delivery of medicaments is to use water. The water content of
human stratum corneum is typically around 15–20% of the tissue
dry weight, although clearly this varies depending on the external environment such as humidity. Soaking the skin in water, exposing the
membrane to high humidities or, as is more usual under clinical conditions, occluding the tissue so preventing transepidermal water loss
can allow the stratum corneum to reach water contents in equilibrium with that of the underlying epidermal skin cells. Thus, on occlusion, the water content of this outer membrane can approach 400%
of the tissue dry weight. Many clinically effective preparations and
products such as ointments and patches are occlusive, which provides
one mechanism of enhanced drug delivery; numerous patch formulations deliver drugs at higher than would be expected rates due to
modification of the stratum corneum water content.
In general, increased tissue hydration appears to increase transdermal delivery of both hydrophilic and lipophilic permeants. However, Bucks and Maibach cautioned against such a generalisation,
stating that occlusion does not necessarily increase percutaneous absorption, and that transdermal delivery of hydrophilic compounds
may not be enhanced by occlusion [3]. Further, they warn that
A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 64 (2012) 128–137 129
occlusion could cause some local skin irritation with clear implications for the design and manufacture of transdermal and topical
preparations.
Considering the heterogeneous nature of human stratum corneum
it is not surprising that water within this membrane is found in several ‘states’. Typically, from thermal analysis and spectroscopic methodologies, some 25–35% of the water present in stratum corneum can
be assessed as ‘bound’, i.e. is associated with some structural elements within the tissue [4]. The remaining water within the tissue
is ‘free’ and is available to act as a solvent within the membrane for
polar permeants. Human skin also contains a hygroscopic humectant
mixture of amino acids, amino acid derivatives and salts termed the
natural moisturising factor (NMF). This material retains water within
the stratum corneum and helps to maintain tissue pliability. Further,
the keratin-filled corneocytes containing functional groups such as
\OH and C\OOH are also expected to bind water molecules within
the tissue. Considering such disparate potential water binding sites,
the absorption (and desorption) of water to and from stratum
corneum is complex. However, it is notable that even maintaining a
stratum corneum membrane over a strong dessicant such as phosphorous pentoxide, will not remove all the water from the tissue—
there remains a strongly bound fraction of 5–10% water that cannot
be removed under such conditions.
Despite extensive research in the area, the mechanisms of action by
which water increases transdermal drug delivery are unclear. Clearly
free water within the tissue could alter the solubility of a permeant in
the stratum corneum and hence could modify partitioning from the
permeant vehicle into the membrane. Such a mechanism could partially explain elevated hydrophilic drug fluxes under occlusive conditions
but would fail to explain hydration-enhanced delivery for lipophilic
permeants such as steroids. Since the principle barrier to transdermal
drug delivery resides in the stratum corneum lipids it may be expected
that high water contents, generated by occlusion or soaking, would
cause some swelling and hence disruption to these domains possibly
by swelling the polar head group regions of the bilayers. However, investigations by Bouwstra and co-workers using diffractometry
methods have shown that water does not cause modification to the
lipid bilayer packing [5]. Such findings raise the question “Where
does the water go?”. Clearly the corneocytes take up water and swell.
One may expect that such swelling of cells would impact upon the
lipid structure between the corneocytes causing some disruption to
the bilayer packing. Again the experimental evidence contradicts this
view. Data from freeze fracture electron microscopy of fully hydrated
stratum corneum shows that the intercellular lipid bilayers contain
water pools with vesicle-like structures occasionally found but no
gross distortion to the lipid domains [6].
Elias et al. [7] consider the presence of an aqueous pore pathway
in the stratum corneum, consisting of lacunar domains (sites of
corneodesmosome degradation) embedded within the lipid bilayers.
Although scattered and discontinuous under normal physiological
conditions, they suggest that under high stress conditions (such as
extensive hydration, iontophoresis or ultrasound) the lacunae expand, interconnect and form a continuous “pore pathway”. The formation of such a route would markedly enhance drug penetration.
When examining the literature on the effects of water on transdermal permeation difficulties can arise from variable responses
shown by different species. For example, Bond and Barry showed
that hairless mouse skin is unsuitable as a model for human stratum
corneum when examining hydration effects; the rodent skin permeability rose over 50-fold when hydrated for 24 h in contrast to results
from human skin membranes [8]. Thus literature examining water effects on skin permeability using animal models should be viewed
with some caution.
3.2. Sulphoxides and similar chemicals
Dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) is one of the earliest and most widely studied penetration enhancers (Fig. 2). It is a powerful aprotic solvent which hydrogen bonds with itself rather than with water; it is
colourless, odourless and is hygroscopic and is often used in many
areas of pharmaceutical sciences as a “universal solvent”. DMSO is
used as a co-solvent in a vehicle for a commercial preparation of
idoxuridine, used to treat severe herpetic infections of the skin, particularly those caused by herpes simplex. DMSO alone has also been
applied topically to treat systemic inflammation, although currently
it is used only to treat animals.
Fig. 1. Actions of penetration enhancers within the intercellular lipid domain (modified from [2]).
130 A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 64 (2012) 128–137
A vast array of literature describes the penetration enhancing activities of DMSO, and studies have shown it to be effective in promoting both hydrophilic and lipophilic permeants. Thus, it has been
shown to promote the permeation of, for example, antiviral agents,
steroids and antibiotics. DMSO works rapidly as a penetration enhancer—spillage of the material onto the skin can be tasted in the
mouth within seconds. Although DMSO is an excellent accelerant it
does create problems. The effects of the enhancer are concentration
dependent and generally co-solvents containing >60% DMSO are
needed for optimum enhancement efficacy. However, at these relatively high concentrations DMSO can cause erythema and wheals of
the stratum corneum and may denature some proteins. Studies
performed over 40 years ago on healthy volunteers painted with
90% DMSO twice daily for 3 weeks resulted in erythema, scaling, contact uticaria, stinging and burning sensations and several volunteers
developed systemic symptoms [9]. A further problem with DMSO
use as a penetration enhancer is the metabolite dimethylsulphide
produced from the solvent; dimethylsulphide produces a foul odour
on the breath. When examining the wealth of literature reporting
DMSO activity as a penetration enhancer it is essential to consider
the membrane employed by the investigators since animal membranes and especially those from rodents tend to be considerably
more fragile than human skin membranes. Thus, the actions of this
powerful aprotic solvent on animal tissue may be dramatically greater than the effects seen on a human skin membrane.
Since DMSO is problematic for use as a penetration enhancer, researchers have investigated similar, chemically related materials as accelerants. Dimethylacetamide (DMAC) and dimethylformamide (DMF)
are similarly powerful aprotic solvents with structures akin to that of
DMSO. Also in common with DMSO, both solvents have a broad
range of penetration enhancing activities, for example, promoting the
flux of hydrocortisone, lidocaine and naloxone through skin membranes. However, Southwell and Barry, showing a 12-fold increase in
the flux of caffeine permeating across the DMF treated human skin,
concluded that the enhancer caused irreversible membrane damage
[10]. Despite the evidence that DMF irreversibly damaged human
skin membranes, this penetration enhancer has been used in vivo
and promoted the bioavailability of betamethasone-17-benzoate as
judged by the vasoconstrictor assay [11,12]. Further structural analogues have been prepared including alkylmethylsulphoxides such as
decylmethylsulphoxide (DCMS). This analogue has been shown to act
reversibly on human skin and, like its parent DMSO, also possesses a
concentration dependent effect. The majority of available literature
shows that DCMS is a potent enhancer for hydrophilic permeants but
is less effective at promoting transdermal delivery of lipophilic agents.
The mechanisms of the sulphoxide penetration enhancers, and
DMSO in particular, are complex. DMSO is widely used to denature
proteins and on application to human skin has been shown to change
the intercellular keratin confirmation, from α helical to a β sheet
[13,14]. As well as an effect on the proteins, DMSO has also been
shown to interact with the intercellular lipid domains of human stratum corneum. Considering the small highly polar nature of this molecule it is feasible that DMSO interacts with the head groups of
some bilayer lipids to distort to the packing geometry. Further,
DMSO within skin membranes may facilitate drug partitioning from
a formulation into this “universal solvent” within the tissue.
3.3. Azone
Azone (1-dodecylazacycloheptan-2-one or laurocapram) was the
first molecule specifically designed as a skin penetration enhancer
(Fig. 3). Chemically it may be considered to be a hybrid of a cyclic
amide, as with pyrrolidone structures (see Section 3.4 below) with
an alkylsulphoxide but is missing the aprotic sulphoxide group that
provides some of the disadvantages listed above for DMSO. Azone is
a colourless, odourless liquid with a melting point of −7 °C and it
possesses a smooth, oily but yet non-greasy feel. As would be
expected from its chemical structure, Azone is a highly lipophilic material with a logPoctanol/water around 6.2 and it is soluble in and is compatible with most organic solvents including alcohols and propylene
glycol (PG). The chemical has low irritancy, very low toxicity (oral
LD50 in rat of 9 g/kg) and little pharmacological activity although
some evidence exists for an antiviral effect. Thus, judging from the
above, Azone appears to possess many of the desirable qualities listed
for a penetration enhancer in Section 2.
Azone enhances the skin transport of a wide variety of drugs including steroids, antibiotics and antiviral agents. The literature
contains reports describing activity in promoting flux of both hydrophilic and lipophilic permeants. As with many penetration enhancers,
the efficacy of Azone appears strongly concentration dependent and
is also influenced by the choice of vehicle from which it is applied.
Surprisingly, Azone is most effective at low concentrations, being
employed typically between 0.1% and 5%, often between 1% and 3%.
Although Azone has been in use for some 25 years, researchers continue to investigate its mechanism of action. Azone probably exerts
its penetration enhancing effects through interactions with the lipid
domains of the stratum corneum. Considering the chemical structure
of the molecule (possessing a large polar head group and lipid alkyl
chain) it would be expected that the enhancer partitions into the bilayer lipids to disrupt their packing arrangement; integration into the
lipids is unlikely to be homogeneous considering the variety of compositional and packing domains within stratum corneum lipid bilayers. Thus, Azone molecules may exist dispersed within the barrier
lipids or in separate domains within the bilayers. A ‘soup spoon’
model for Azone's confirmation within stratum corneum lipids supports the above mechanisms of action [15] and electron diffraction
studies using lipids isolated from human stratum corneum provides
good evidence that Azone exists (or partially exists) as a distinct
phase within the stratum corneum lipids [16]. Extensive discussion
concerning the metabolism and fate of Azone and on its use as a penetration enhancer has been reviewed and the molecule is still being
investigated presently [17–19].
3.4. Pyrrolidones
A range of pyrrolidones and structurally related compounds have
been investigated as potential penetration enhancers in human skin.
As with Azone and many other penetration enhancers, they apparently
have greater effects on hydrophilic permeants than for lipophilic materials, although this may be attributable to the greater enhancement potential for the poorer hydrophilic permeants. N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone
(NMP) and 2-pyrrolidone (2P) are the most widely studied enhancers
of this group. NMP is a polar aprotic solvent and is used to extract aroFig. 2. Aprotic solvents which act as potent penetration enhancers. matic moieties from oils, olefins and animal feeds. It is a clear liquid at
A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 64 (2012) 128–137 131
room temperature and is miscible with most common solvents including water and alcohols. Likewise 2P is miscible with most solvents,
again including water and alcohols, and is a liquid above 25 °C. 2P
also finds commercial use as a solvent in oil production and is useful
as a solvent for sugars, iodine and polymers. 2P is an intermediate in
the manufacture of the widely used pharmaceutical excipients
polyvinylpyrrolidone.
Pyrrolidones have been used as permeation promoters for numerous molecules including hydrophilic (e.g. mannitol, 5-fluorouracil
and sulphaguanidine) and lipophilic (betamethasone-17-benzoate,
hydrocortisone and progesterone) permeants. As with many studies,
higher flux enhancements have been reported for the hydrophilic
molecules. Recently NMP was employed with limited success as a
penetration enhancer for captopril when formulated into a matrix
type transdermal patch [20].
In terms of mechanisms of action, the pyrrolidones partition well
into human corneum stratum. Within the tissue they may act by altering the solvent nature of the membrane and pyrrolidones have been
used to generate ‘reservoirs’ within skin membranes. Such a reservoir
effect offers potential for sustained release of a permeant from the stratum corneum over extended time periods. However, as with several
other penetration enhancers, clinical use of pyrrolidones is precluded
due to adverse reactions. An in vivo vasoconstrictor bioavailability
study demonstrated that pyrrolidones caused erythema in some volunteers, although this effect was relatively short lived. Also, a toxic hygroscopic contact reaction to N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone has recently been
reported [21].
3.5. Fatty acids
Percutaneous drug absorption has been increased by a wide variety of long chain fatty acids, the most popular of which is oleic acid.
It is of interest to note that many penetration enhancers such as
Azone contain saturated or unsaturated hydrocarbon chains and
some structure activity relationships have been drawn from the extensive studies of Aungst who employed a range of fatty acids and
alcohols, sulphoxides, surfactants and amides as enhancers for naloxone [22,23]. From these extensive experiments, it appears that saturated alkyl chain lengths of around C10–C12 attached to a polar head
group yields a potent enhancer. In contrast, for penetration enhancers
containing unsaturated alkyl chains, then C18 appears near optimum.
For such unsaturated compounds, the bent cis configuration is
expected to disturb intercellular lipid packing more so than the
trans arrangement, which differs little from the saturated analogue
(Fig. 4).
Again from extensive literature reports fatty acids have been used
to improve transdermal delivery of, amongst others, estradiol, progesterone, acyclovir, 5-fluorouracil and salicylic acid, indicating that
these enhancers can be used to promote delivery of both lipophilic
and hydrophilic permeants. Lauric acid in PG enhanced the delivery
of highly lipophilic antiestrogens [24]. Fatty acid effects on drug delivery to and through human skin can vary. For example, Santoyo and
Ygartua, employed the mono-unsaturated oleic acid, polyunsaturated, linoleic and linolenic acids and the saturated lauric acid enhancers
for promoting piroxicam flux [25]. Pre-treating the tissue with the
fatty acids increased the amount of piroxicam retained within the
skin and also decreased the lag time to pseudo steady state flux.
Oleic acid has been shown to be effective for many drugs, for example
increasing the flux of salicylic acid 28-fold and 5-flourouracil flux
56-fold through human skin membrane in vitro [26]. As with Azone,
oleic acid is effected at relatively low concentrations (typically less
than 10%) and can work synergistically when delivered from vehicles
such as PG or ternary systems with dimethyl isosorbide [27]. Various
analogues of fatty acids have been researched as penetration enhancers, for example diesters increased the permeation of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs through rat skin [28].
Considerable efforts have been directed at investigating the mechanisms of action of oleic acid as a penetration enhancer in human
skin. It is clear from numerous literature reports that the enhancer interacts with and modifies the lipid domains of the stratum corneum,
as would be expected for a long chain fatty acid with a cis configuration (Fig. 4). Spectroscopic investigations using deuterated oleic acid
in human stratum corneum indicates that oleic acid at higher concentration can also exist as a separate phase (or as ‘pools’) within the bilayer lipids [29]. More recently, electron microscopic studies have
shown that a discreet lipid domain is induced within stratum
corneum bilayer lipids on exposure to oleic acid [30]. The formation
of such pools would provide permeability defects within the bilayer
lipids thus facilitating permeation of hydrophilic permeants through
the membrane.
3.6. Alcohols, fatty alcohols and glycols
Ethanol is commonly used in many transdermal formulations and
is often the solvent of choice for use in patches. It is also commonly
employed as a co-solvent with water for ensuring sink conditions
during in vitro permeation experiments. As with water, ethanol permeates rapidly through human skin with a steady state flux of approximately 1 mg cm2
/h [31].
Ethanol has been used to enhance the flux of levonorgestrel, estradiol, hydro-cortisone and 5-fluorouracil through rat skin [32] and of
estradiol through human skin in vivo [33]. However, when using an
ethanol water co-solvent vehicle, the enhancement effect of ethanol
appears to be concentration dependent. Salicylate ion diffusion across
human epidermal membranes was promoted up to an ethanol:water
composition of 0.63 whereas higher levels of the alcohol decreased
permeation [34]. Similar results have been reported for nitroglycerine
[31] and estradiol [35] and zidovudine [36]. It is probable that at
higher ethanol levels dehydration of the biological membrane reduced permeation across the tissue.
Ethanol can exert its permeation enhancing activity through various mechanisms. Firstly, as a solvent, it can increase the solubility of
the drug in the vehicle—although at steady state the flux of a
permeant from any saturated, non-enhancing, vehicle should be
equivalent. However, for poorly soluble permeants that are prone to
depletion within the donor during a steady state permeation study,
then ethanol can increase permeant solubility in the donor phase
[33]. Further, permeation of ethanol into the stratum corneum can
alter the solubility properties of the tissue with a consequent
improvement for drug partitioning into the membrane [35]. Additionally, it is also feasible that the rapid permeation of ethanol, or
evaporative loss of this volatile solvent, from the donor phase modifies the thermodynamic activity of the drug within the formulation.
Such an effect is most apparent when applying a finite dose of a formulation onto the skin surface before evaporation of the alcohol; as
ethanol is lost, drug concentration can increase beyond saturated
Fig. 3. Azone, the first molecule to be synthesised so as to act as a skin penetration
enhancer.
132 A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 64 (2012) 128–137
solubility providing a supersaturated state with a greater driving
force for permeation. Such a mechanism may operate for transdermal
delivery from patches where ethanol, typically included to solubilise
the drug or to apply the adhesive, may traverse the stratum corneum
rapidly leaving behind a metastable supersaturated permeant which
is inhibited from crystallising by polymers that are typically incorporated into patches. A further potential mechanism of action arising as
a consequence of rapid ethanol permeation across the skin has been
reported; solvent ‘drag’ may carry permeant into the tissue as ethanol
traverses, although such a mechanism has been discounted for
morphine hydrochloride permeation from ethanol and methanol
containing formulations [37]. In addition, ethanol as a volatile solvent
may extract some of the lipid fraction from within the stratum
corneum when used at high concentration for prolonged times;
though not a ‘enhancing’ effect, such a mechanism would clearly improve drug flux through skin.
Fatty alcohols (or alkanols) may also have penetration enhancing
activity. These molecules are typically applied to the skin in a
co-solvent—often PG—at concentrations between 1% and 10%. As
with fatty acids described above (Section 3.5), some structure/activity
relationships for fatty alcohol penetration enhancement have been
drawn with lower activities reported for branched alkanols whereas
1-butanol was shown to be the most effective enhancer for
levonorgesterol traversing rat skin [32]. Other workers have shown
1-octanol and 1-propranolol to be effective enhancers for salicylic
acid and nicotinamide in hairless mouse skin. More recent structure
activity relationships have been drawn for fatty alcohols using melatonin permeating through porcine and human skin in vitro [38]; comparing activities for saturated fatty alcohols from octanol to myristyl
alcohol, a parabolic relationship was found with a maximum enhancement effect given by decanol. Enhancement activity also
showed a general increase when adding up to two unsaturated
bonds into the alcohols, but activity fell when three double bonds
were introduced.
PG is widely used as a vehicle for penetration enhancers and
shows synergistic action when used with, for example, oleic acid
(see Section 3.5). However, PG has also been used as a penetration
enhancer in its own right. Literature reports concerning the efficacy
of PG as a permeation enhancer are mixed; evidence suggests at
best only a very mild enhancement effect for molecules such as estradiol and 5-fluorouracil. As with ethanol, PG permeates well through
human stratum corneum and its mechanisms of action are probably
similar to those suggested above for ethanol. Permeation of the solvent through the tissue could alter thermodynamic activity of the
drug in the vehicle which would in turn modify the driving force for
diffusion, solvent may partition into the tissue facilitating uptake of
the drug into skin and there may be some minor disturbance to
intercellular lipid packing within the stratum corneum bilayers.
3.7. Surfactants
As with some of the materials described previously (for example
ethanol and PG) surfactants are found in many existing therapeutic,
cosmetic and agro-chemical preparations. Usually, surfactants are
added to formulations in order to solubilise lipophilic active ingredients, and so they have potential to solubilise lipids within the stratum
corneum. Typically composed of a lipophilic alkyl or aryl fatty chain,
together with a hydrophilic head group, surfactants are often described in terms of the nature of the hydrophilic moiety. Anionic surfactants include sodium lauryl sulphate (SLS), cationic surfactants
include cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide, the nonoxynol surfactants are non-ionic surfactants and zwitterionic surfactants include
dodecyl betaine. Anionic and cationic surfactants have potential to
damage human skin; SLS is a powerful irritant and increased the
trans epidemeral water loss in human volunteers in vivo [39] and
both anionic and cationic surfactants swell the stratum corneum
and interact with intercellular keratin. Non-ionic surfactants tend to
be widely regarded as safe. Surfactants generally have low chronic
toxicity and most have been shown to enhance the flux of materials
permeating through biological membranes.
Most studies evaluating enhancement activity have focussed on
the use of anionic and non-ionic surfactants. Anionic materials themselves tend to permeate relatively poorly through human stratum
corneum upon short time period exposure (for example when mimicking occupation exposure) but permeation increases with application time. Relatively few studies exist assessing non-ionic surfactant
permeation through human skin but Watkinson et al. showed that
around 0.5% of the applied dose of nonoxynol surfactant materials
traversed human skin after 48 h exposure in vitro [40]. Surfactant facilitated permeation of many materials through skin membranes has
been researched, with reports of significant enhancement of materials such as chloramphenicol through hairless mouse skin by SLS,
and acceleration of hydrocortisone and lidocaine permeating across
hairless mouse skin by the non-ionic surfactant Tween 80 [41,42].
However, as with several of the enhancers described above, the
choice of model membrane can dramatically affect the scale of permeation enhancement. Tween 80 did not enhance nicardipine or ketorolac
permeation in monkeys in vivo [43]. Likewise, 5-flourouracil permeation through human and snake skin in-vitro was not improved by
0.1% Tween 20 in normal saline [26,44], whereas the same enhancer
formulation improved 5-flourouracil permeation across hairless
mouse skin 6-fold [44]. From the literature it is apparent that, in general terms, non-ionic surfactants have only a minor enhancement effect
in human skin whereas anionic surfactants can have a more pronounced effect.
3.8. Urea
Urea is a hydrating agent (a hydrotrope) used in the treatment of
scaling conditions such as psoriasis, ichthyosis and other hyperkeratotic skin conditions. Applied in a water in oil vehicle, urea
alone or in combination with ammonium lactate produced significant
stratum cornum hydration and improved barrier function when
Fig. 4. Fatty acids, illustrating the different space-filling properties of saturated and
trans/cis unsaturated hydrocarbon tails.
A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 64 (2012) 128–137 133
compared to the vehicle alone in human volunteers in vivo [45]. Urea
also has keratolytic properties, usually when used in combination
with salicylic acid for keratolysis. The somewhat modest penetration
enhancing activity of urea probably results from a combination of
increasing stratum cornum water content (water is a valuable penetration enhancer, see Section 3.1) and through the keratolytic activity.
As urea itself possesses only marginal penetration enhancing
activity, attempts have been made to synthesis analogues containing
more potent enhancing moieties. Thus Wong and co-workers
synthesised cyclic urea analogues and found them to be as potent as
Azone for promoting indomethacin across shed snake skin and hairless mouse skin [46]. A series of alkyl and aryl urea analogies were
moderately effective as enhancers for 5-flourouracil when applied in
PG to human skin in vitro, though urea itself was ineffective [47].
3.9. Essential oils, terpenes and terpenoids
Terpenes are found in essential oils, and are compounds comprising only carbon, hydrogen and oxygen atoms, yet which are not
aromatic. Numerous terpenes have long been used as medicines,
flavourings and fragrance agents. For examples, menthol is traditionally used in inhalation pharmaceuticals and has a mild antipruritic effect when incorporated into emollient preparations. It is also used as
a fragrance and to flavour toothpastes, peppermint sweets and
menthylated cigarettes.
The essential oils of eucalyptus, chenopodium and ylang ylang
were effective penetration enhancers for 5-flouorouracil traversing
in human skin in vivo [48]. The most potent of these essential oils, eucalyptus, increased the permeability coefficient of the drug 34-fold.
The principal terpene element within eucalyptus oil is 1,8-cineole
and this molecule was one of a series of 17 monoterpenes and
terpenoids evaluated as enhancers for the model hydrophilic drug
5-flourouracil in human skin in vitro [49]—see Fig. 5. Some structure
activity relationships were apparent from the data in that hydrocarbon terpenes were less potent enhancers for this hydrophilic drug
than were alcohol or ketone containing terpenes, and the greatest enhancement activity was shown by the oxide terpenes and terpenoids.
Within this oxide subclass, some potency variation was also apparent
with ring-bridged oxides (cyclic ethers) being more potent than
1,2-oxygen linked (epoxide) molecules; pre-treatment of human epidermal membranes with 1,8-cineole provided a near 100-fold increase in the permeability coefficient of the model drug. However,
such tentative structure activity relationships appear to be drug specific. The same terpenes were employed in an identical protocol for
the lipophilic drug estradiol [50]. The results show that, unlike for
5-flourouracil where alcohol and ketone terpenes have moderate enhancement activities (10–40 fold increases in permeability coefficient), these same agents had no accelerent activity towards the
lipophilic model drug and indeed appeared to retard its permeation.
The cyclic ethers, so potent for 5-fluorouracil, provided only moderate enhancements for estradiol permeation and, in contrast to the hydrophilic drug, hydrocarbon terpenes (such as D-limonene) were
generally the most effective terpene enhancers for the steroid. Similar
results were reported for the permeation of another lipophilic
molecule, indomethacin, traversing rat skin; hydrocarbon terpenes,
especially limonene, were as effective as Azone in promoting drug
flux and oxygen containing terpenes (carvone, 1,8-cineole) were ineffective [51,52]. Other hydrophilic drugs such as propanolol and diazepam are also enhanced by terpenes that contained no polar
groups. As with many enhancers described above, a synergistic effect
for terpene efficacy has also been shown when PG is used as the vehicle [53]; with this co-solvent, enhancer efficacies for carveol, carvone,
pulegone and 1,-8 cineole rose approximately 4-fold, explained by
improved partitioning of the enhancer into the stratum corneum. Cyclic monoterpenes generally showed stronger enhancement of
curcumin than other terpenes, flavanoids and cholestanol [54].
Beyond the relatively small monoterpenes described above, larger
terpene molecules (sesquiterpenes) have also been evaluated as enhancers for molecules permeating human skin membranes. Thus, materials such as nerolidol (Fig. 5) were shown to enhance 5-flourouracil
permeability over 20-fold through human skin in vitro [55]. As larger
more lipophilic enhancers, these agents exerted their effects over
prolonged periods—for up to 5 days—in contrast to the monoterpenes
that tended to wash out relatively easily from the stratum corneum.
Moderate enhancement activity has also been reported for the cosmetically valuable terpene α-bisabolol [56].
Terpenes continue to be a popular choice of enhancer for delivering
materials across skin membranes. For example, L-menthol has been
used to facilitate in vitro permeation of morphine hydrochloride
through hairless rat skin [37] imipramine hydrochloride across rat
skin [57] and hydrocortisone through hairless mouse skin [58]. Recently, niaouli oil was the effective of six essential oils in promoting estradiol
penetration through hairless mouse skin [59]. It is interesting that there
is currently little control on the topical use of most terpenes, and many
‘aromatherapy’ oils and formulations contain appreciable quantities of
these enhancers. Their excessive use offers potential for permeation of
hazardous compounds from the same formulations into the skin;
some terpenes also have pharmacological activity.
From the above it is apparent that the smaller terpenes tend to be
more active permeation enhancers than the larger sequiterpenes.
Further, it also appears that hydrocarbon or the ‘non-polar group
containing’ terpenes, such as limonene provide better enhancement
for lipophilic permeants than do the ‘polar’ terpenes. Conversely, the
polar group containing terpenes (such as menthol, 1,8-cineole) provide
better enhancement for hydrophilic permeants. Such as relationship
tends to imply that one mechanism by which this agents operate is to
modify the solvent nature of the stratum corneum, improving drug
partitioning into the tissue. Many terpenes permeate human skin well
[55], and large amounts of terpenes (up to 1.5 μg/cm2
) were found in
the epidermis after application from a matrix type patch [60]. With
loss of terpenes, which are generally good solvents, from a formulation
there could be an alteration to the thermodynamic activity of the
permeant in the formulation as was described for ethanol. Terpenes
may also modify drug diffusivity through the membrane. During steady
state permeation experiments using terpenes as penetration enhancers,
the lag time for permeation is usually reduced, indicating some increase
in diffusivity of the drug through the membrane following terpene
treatment. Small angle X-ray diffraction studies have also indicated
that D-limonene and 1,8-cineole disrupt stratum corneum bilayer lipids,
whereas nerolidol, a long chain sesquiterpene, reinforces the bilayers,
possibly by orientating alongside the stratum corneum lipids [61]. Spectroscopic evidence has also suggested that, as with Azone and oleic acid,
terpenes could exist within separate domains in stratum corneum
lipids.
3.10. Phospholipids
Many studies have employed phospholipids as vesicles (liposomes) to carry drugs into and through human skin. However, a
few studies have used phospholipids in a non-vesicular form as penetration enhancers. For example, theophylline was enhanced through
hairless mouse skin by 1% phosphatidylcholine in PG, a concentration
at which liposomes would not form [62]. Similarly, indomethacin flux
was enhanced through rat skin by the same phospholipid and hydrogenated soy bean phospholipids have been reported to enhance
diclofenac permeation through rat skin in vivo.
There is no compelling evidence to suggest that phospholipids interact directly with stratum corneum packing, though this may be
expected when considering their physico-chemical properties and
structures. However, phospholipids can occlude the skin surface and
thus can increase tissue hydration, which, as shown above, can increase drug permeation. When applied to the stratum corneum as
134 A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 64 (2012) 128–137
vesicles, phospholipids can fuse with stratum corneum lipids. This
collapse of structure liberates permeant into the vehicle in which
the drug may be poorly soluble and hence thermodynamic activity
could be raised so facilitating drug delivery.
3.11. Solvents at high concentrations
In addition to the activities of penetration enhancers within the
intercellular domain, high levels of potent solvents may have more
drastic effects (Fig. 6). They may damage desmosomes and proteinlike bridges, leading to fissuring of the intercellular lipid and splitting
of the stratum corneum squames. Solvent may enter the corneocyte,
drastically disrupting the keratin and even forming vacuoles [2]. Such
dramatic effects would be even less acceptable to regulatory agencies
(and patients!) than lesser insults to the intercellular lipid.
3.12. Metabolic interventions
A more interventionist approach to penetration enhancement is
proposed by Elias et al. (see [7] for an up-to-date summary). Strategies that interfere with any or all of the processes of synthesis, assembly, secretion, activation, processing, or assembling/disassembling of
the extracellular lamellar membranes, could promote permeation as
barrier homeostasis is altered. As the authors admit, such an approach
would pose significant regulatory problems, not least of which would
be issues related to increased xenobiotic or microbial access. The concept of interfering with barrier homeostasis on a relatively long time
scale poses a myriad of clinical considerations.
4. General comments on penetration enhancers
The above list of materials that have been used as penetration enhancers is clearly not exhaustive but is intended to illustrate the
range of agents that have been employed for facilitating transdermal
drug delivery. Several common themes emerge from the above.
a) It is difficult to select rationally a penetration enhancer for a given
permeant. Penetration enhancer potencies appear to be drug specific, or at best may be predictive for a series of permeants with
similar physico-chemical properties (such as similar partition coefficients, molecular weights and solubilities). Some broad generic
trends are apparent, such as the use of hydrocarbon monoterpenes for lipophilic permeants, but the level of enhancement
expected for these agents is unpredictable.
b) Penetration enhancements through animal skins, and rodent skins
in particular, are generally considerably greater than those obtained
with human skin.
c) Penetration enhancers tend to work well with co-solvents such as
PG or ethanol. Synergistic effects are found between enhancers
such as Azone, oleic acid (and other fatty acids) and terpenes with
PG.
d) Most penetration enhancers have a complex concentration dependent effect. This is shown clearly by Azone which is effective in promoting the transdermal flux for many drugs when used at 1% in PG
but which is far less effective when applied at higher concentrations
or neat (also relates to the use of co-solvents as above).
Fig. 5. Example terpenes that promote skin penetration of a variety of drugs.
Fig. 6. Dramatic action of enhancers (particularly solvents) on the integrity of stratum corneum adhesion (modified from [2]).
A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 64 (2012) 128–137 135
e) Potential mechanisms of action of enhancers are varied, and can
range from direct effects on the skin to modification of the formulation. Thus, directly acting on the skin, enhancers can:
i. Act on the stratum corneum intracellular keratin, denature it or
modify its conformation causing swelling and increased hydration.
ii. Affect the desmosomes that maintain cohesion between
corneocytes.
iii. Modify the intercellular lipid domains to reduce the barrier
resistance of the bilayer lipids. Disruption to the lipid bilayers
could be homogeneous where the enhancer distributes evenly within the complex bilayer lipids but more likely the accelerant will be heterogeneously concentrated within domains
of the bilayer lipids. Such ‘pooling’ phenomenen has been
shown for oleic acid and Azone, and is likely to occur for
most enhancers considering the range of packing and different molecular domains in the stratum corneum lipids.
iv. Alter the solvent nature of the stratum corneum to modify
partitioning of the drug or of a co-solvent into the tissue
most enhancers are good solvents and so, for example, the
pyrrolidones can increase the amount of permeant present
within the skin.
The above mechanisms of action have been embraced within
a general scheme to explain enhancer effects on stratum
corneum, termed the lipid–protein-partititioning theory; enhancers can act by altering skin lipids and/or proteins and/or
by affecting partitioning behaviour [63]. In addition, penetration enhancement can be indirect by;
i. Modification of thermodynamic activity of the vehicle. Rapid
permeation of a good solvent from the donor solution, such
as ethanol, can leave the permeant in a more thermodynamically active state than when the solvent was present—even
to the point of supersaturation.
ii. It has been suggested that solvent permeating through the
membrane could ‘drag’ the permeant with it, though this
concept is somewhat controversial and remains to be proven.
iii. Solubilising the permeant in the donor (e.g. with surfactants), especially where solubility is very low as with steroids in aqueous donor solutions, can reduce depletion
effects and prolong drug permeation.
f) Many of the chemicals described above are used for alternative
reasons within topical and transdermal preparations. For example,
a topical prepartion could contain PG as a vehicle, a surfactant to
solubilise the drug and a terpene as a fragrance material. The efficacy of some topical preparations is probably due to penetration
enhancement by these types of agents, though no commercial
preparations yet claim to incorporate an agent used specifically
for this purpose.
References
[1] B.W. Barry, Dermatological Formulations: Percutaneous Absorption, Marcel Dekker,
New York, 1983.
[2] G.K. Menon, S.H. Lee, Ultrastructural effects of some solvents and vehicles on the
stratum corneum and other skin components: evidence for an “extended
mosaic-partitioning model of the skin barrier”, in: M.S. Roberts, K.A. Walters
(Eds.), Dermal Absorption and Toxicity Assessment, Marcel Dekker, New York,
1998, Chapter 29.
[3] D. Bucks, H.I. Maibach, Occlusion does not uniformly enhance penetration
in vivo, in: R.L. Bronaugh, H.I. Maibach (Eds.), Percutaneous Absorption;
Drugs—Cosmetics—Mechanisms—Methodology, 3rd ed., Marcel Dekker, New York,
1999, Chapter 4.
[4] K. Walkley, Bound water in stratum corneum measured by differential scanning
calorimetry, J. Invest. Dermatol. 59 (1972) 225–227.
[5] P.A. Cornwell, B.W. Barry, Sesquiterpene components of volatile oils as skin penetration enhancers for the hydrophilic permeant 5-fluorouracil, J. Pharm.
Pharmacol. 46 (1994) 261–269.
[6] D.A. Van Hal, E. Jeremiasse, H.E. Junginger, F. Spies, J.A. Bouwstra, Structure of
fully hydrated human stratum corneum: a freeze fracture electron microscopy
study, J. Invest. Dermatol. 106 (1996) 89–95.
[7] P.M. Elias, J. Tsai, G.K. Menon, W.M. Holleran, K.R. Feingold, The potential of metabolic interventions to enhance transdermal drug delivery, JID Symp. Proc. 7
(2002) 79–85.
[8] J.R. Bond, B.W. Barry, Limitations of hairless mouse skin as a model for in vitro
permeation studies through human skin: hydration damage, J. Invest. Dermatol.
90 (1986) 486–489.
[9] A.M. Kligman, Topical pharmacology and toxicology of dimethylsulfoxide, J. Am.
Med. Assoc. 193 (1965) 796.
[10] D. Southwell, B.W. Barry, Penetration enhancers for human skin: mode of action
of 2-pyrrolidone and dimethylformamide on partition and diffusion of model
compounds water, n-alcohols and caffeine, J. Invest. Dermatol. 80 (1983)
507–515.
[11] B.W. Barry, D. Southwell, R. Woodford, Optimisation of bioavailability of topical
steroids: penetration enhancers under occlusion, J. Invest. Dermatol. 82 (1984)
49–52.
[12] S.L. Bennett, B.W. Barry, R. Woodford, Optimisation of bioavailability of topical
steroids: non-occluded penetration enhancers under thermodynamic control,
J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 37 (1984) 298–304.
[13] R.P. Oertel, Protein conformational changes induced in human stratum corneum
by organic sulphoxides: an infrared spectroscopic investigation, Biopolymer 16
(1997) 2329–2345.
[14] A.N.C. Anigbogu, A.C.Williams, B.W. Barry, H.G.M. Edwards, Fourier transform Raman
spectroscopy of interactions between the penetration enhancer dimethylsulphoxide
and human stratum corneum, Int. J. Pharm. 125 (1995) 265–282.
[15] A.J. Hoogstraate, J. Verhoef, J. Brussee, A.P. Ijzerman, F. Spies, H.E. Bodde, Kinetics,
ultrastructural aspects and molecular modelling of transdermal peptide flux enhancement by N-alkylazacycloheptanones, Int. J. Pharm. 76 (1991) 37–47.
[16] G.S.K. Pilgram, J. van der Meulen, G.S. Gooris, H.K. Koerten, J.A. Bouwstra, The influence of two azones and sebaceous lipids on the lateral organization of lipids
isolated from human stratum corneum, Biochim. Biophys. Acta—Biomembr.
1511 (2001) 244–254.
[17] J.W. Wiechers, Absorption, distribution, metabolism, and exretion of the cutaneous penetration enhancer Azone, Ph.D. thesis, University of Groningen, 1989.
[18] J.W. Wiechers, R.A. de Zeeuw, Transdermal drug delivery: efficacy and potential applications of the penetration enhancer Azone, Drug Des. Deliv. 6 (1990) 87–100.
[19] M.I. Afouna, T.K. Fincher, A.A.A. Zaghloul, I.K. Reddy, Effect of Azone upon the in vivo
antiviral efficacy of cidofovir or acyclovir topical formulations in treatment/prevention
of cutaneous HSV-1 infections and its correlation with skin target site free drug concentration in hairless mice, Int. J. Pharm. 253 (2003) 159–168.
[20] E.S. Park, S.J. Chang, Y.S. Rhee, S.C. Chi, Effects of adhesives and permeation enhancers on the skin permeation of captopril, Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 27 (2001)
975–980.
[21] F.H.W. Jungbauer, P.J. Coenraads, S.H. Kardaun, Toxic hygroscopic contact reaction to N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, Contact Dermatitis 45 (2001) 303–304.
[22] B.J. Aungst, N.J. Rogers, E. Shefter, Enhancement of naloxone penetration through
human skin in vitro using fatty acids, fatty alcohols, surfactants, sulfoxides and
amides, Int. J. Pharm. 33 (1986) 225–234.
[23] B.J. Aungst, Structure-effects studies of fatty acid isomers as skin penetration enhancers and skin irritants, Pharm. Res. 6 (1989) 244–247.
[24] A.P. Funke, R. Schiller, H.W. Motzkus, C. Günther, R.H. Müller, R. Lipp, Transdermal delivery of highly lipophilic drugs: in vitro fluxes of antiestrogens,
permeation enhancers, and solvents from liquid formulations, Pharm. Res. 19
(2002) 661–668.
[25] S. Santoyo, P. Ygartua, Effect of skin pre-treatment with fatty acids on percutaneous
absorption and skin retention of piroxicam after its topical application, Eur. J. Pharm.
Biopharm. 50 (2000) 245–250.
[26] M. Goodman, B.W. Barry, Lipid–protein-partitioning theory (LPP) theory of skin
enhancer activity: finite dose technique, Int. J. Pharm. 57 (1989) 29–40.
[27] R. Aboofazeli, H. Zia, T.E. Needham, Transdermal delivery of nicardipine: an approach to in vitro permeation enhancement, Drug Deliv. 9 (2002) 239–247.
[28] K. Takahashi, H. Sakano, N. Numata, S. Kuroda, N. Mizuno, Effect of fatty acid diesters on permeation of anti-inflammatory drugs through rat skin, Drug Dev.
Ind. Pharm. 28 (2002) 1285–1294.
[29] B. Ongpipattanakul, R.R. Burnette, R.O. Potts, M.L. Francoeur, Evidence that oleic
acid exists in a separate phase within stratum corneum lipids, Pharm. Res. 7
(1991) 350–354.
[30] H. Tanojo, A. BosvanGeest, J.A. Bouwstra, H.E. Junginger, H.E. Bodde, In vitro
human skin barrier perturbation by oleic acid: thermal analysis and freeze fracture electron microscopy studies, Thermochim. Acta 293 (1997) 77–85.
[31] B. Berner, G.C. Mazzenga, J.H. Otte, R.J. Steffens, R.-H. Juang, C.D. Ebert, Ethanol:
water mutually enhanced transdermal therapeutic system: II. Skin permeation
of ethanol and nitroglycerin, J. Pharm. Sci. 78 (1989) 402–407.
[32] D. Friend, P. Catz, J. Heller, J. Reid, R. Baker, Transdermal delivery of levonorgestrel
I. Alkanols as permeation enhancers, J. Control. Release 7 (1988) 243–250.
[33] L.K. Pershing, L.D. Lambert, K. Knutson, Mechanism of ethanol-enhanced estradiol
permeation across human skin in vivo, Pharm. Res. 7 (1990) 170–175.
[34] T. Kurihara-Bergstrom, K. Knutson, L.J. De Noble, C.Y. Goates, Percutaneous absorption enhancement of an ionic molecule by ethanol–water systems in
human skin, Pharm. Res. 7 (1990) 762–766.
[35] N.A. Megrab, A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry, Oestradiol permeation across human skin,
silastic and snake skin membranes: the effects of ethanol/water co-solvent systems, Int. J. Pharm. 116 (1995) 101–112.
[36] N.S. Thomas, R. Panchagnula, Transdermal delivery of zidovudine: effect of vehicles on permeation across rat skin and their mechanism of action, Pharm. Sci. 18
(2003) 71–79.
136 A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 64 (2012) 128–137
[37] H. Morimoto, Y. Wada, T. Seki, K. Sugibayashi, In vitro skin permeation of morphine hydrochloride during the finite application of penetration-enhancing system containing water, ethanol and L-menthol, Biol. Pharm. Bull. 25 (2002)
134–136.
[38] S. Andega, N. Kanikkannan, M. Singh, Comparison of the effect of fatty alcohols on
the permeation of melatonin between porcine and human skin, J. Control. Release
77 (2001) 17–25.
[39] R.A. Tupker, J. Pinnagoda, J.P. Nater, The transient and cumulative effect of sodium
lauryl sulphate on the epidermal barrier assessed by transepidermal water loss:
inter-individual variation, Acta Derm. Venereol. (Stockh.) 70 (1990) 1–5.
[40] A.C. Watkinson, D.M. Green, K.R. Brain, V.J. James, K.A. Waters, S. Azri-Meehan, R.
Sharma, W. Dressler, Skin penetration of a series of nonoxynol homologues, in:
K.R. Brain, V.J. James, K.S. Waters (Eds.), Perspectives in Percutaneous Penetration, vol. 5b, STS Publishing, Cardiff, 1998, pp. 54–59.
[41] P.P. Sarpotdar, J.L. Zatz, Percutaneous absorption enhancement by non-ionic surfactants, Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 12 (1986) 1625–1647.
[42] P.P. Sarpotdar, J.L. Zatz, Evaluation of penetration enhancement of lidocaine by
non-ionic surfactants through hairless mouse skin in vitro, J. Pharm. Sci. 75
(1986) 176.
[43] D. Yu, L.M. Sanders, G.W. Davidson, M.J. Marvin, T. Ling, Percutaneous absorption
of nicardipine and ketorolac in rhesus monkeys, Pharm. Res. 5 (1988) 457.
[44] P.C. Rigg, B.W. Barry, Shed snake skin and hairless mouse skin as model membranes for human skin during permeation studies, J. Invest. Dermatol. 94
(1990) 235–240.
[45] M. Gloor, J. Fluhr, B. Wasik, W. Gehring, Clinical effect of salicylic acid and high
dose urea applied in standardized NRF formulations, Pharmazie 56 (2001)
810–814.
[46] O. Wong, N. Tsuzuki, B. Nghiem, J. Kuehnhoff, T. Itoh, K. Masaki, J. Huntingdon,
R. Konishi, J.H. Rytting, T. Higuchi, Unsaturated cyclic ureas as new non-toxic
biodegradable transdermal penetration enhancers: II. Evaluation study, Int. J.
Pharm. 52 (1989) 191–192.
[47] A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry, Urea analogues in propylene glycol as penetration
enhancers in human skin, Int. J. Pharm. 56 (1989) 43–50.
[48] A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry, Essential oils as novel human skin penetration enhancers, Int. J. Pharm. 57 (1989) R7–R9.
[49] A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry, Terpenes and the lipid–protein-partititioning theory of
skin penetration enhancers, Pharm. Res. 8 (1991) 17–24.
[50] A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry, The enhancement index concept applied to terpene
penetration enhancers for human skin and model lipophilic (oestradiol) and hydrophilic (5-fluorouracil) drugs, Int. J. Pharm. 74 (1991) 157–168.
[51] T. Nagai, H. Okabe, A. Ogura, K. Takayama, Effect of limonene and related compounds on the percutaneous absorption of indomethacin, in: Proceedings of the
16th International Symposium on Controlled Release Bioactive Material, Chicago,
USA, 1989, pp. 181–182.
[52] H. Okabe, K. Takayama, A. Ogura, T. Nagai, Effect of limonene and related compounds on the percutaneous absorption of indomethacin, Drug Des. Deliv. 4
(1989) 313–321.
[53] B.W. Barry, A.C. Williams, Human skin penetration enhancement: the synergy of
propylene glycol with terpenes, in: Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium on Controlled Release Bioactive Material, Chicago, USA, 1989, pp. 33–34.
[54] J.-Y. Fang, C.-F. Hung, H.-C. Chiu, J.-J. Wang, T.-F. Chan, Efficacy and irritancy of enhancers on the in vitro and in vivo percutaneous absorption of curcumin, J. Pharm.
Pharmacol. 55 (2003) 593–601.
[55] P.A. Cornwell, B.W. Barry, Sesquiterpene components of volatile oils as skin penetration enhancers for the hydrophilic permeant 5-fluorouracil, J. Pharm.
Pharmacol. 46 (1994) 261–269.
[56] R. Kadir, B.W. Barry, α-Bisabolol, a possible safe penetration enhancer for dermal
and transdermal therapeutics, Int. J. Pharm. 70 (1991) 87–94.
[57] A.K. Jain, N.S. Thomas, R. Panchagnula, Transdermal drug delivery of imipramine
hydrochloride: I. Effect of terpenes, J. Control. Release 79 (2002) 93–101.
[58] A.F. El-Kattan, C.S. Asbill, B.B. Michniak, The effect of terpene enhancer lipophilicity on the percutaneous permeation of hydrocortisone formulated in HPMC gel
systems, Int. J. Pharm. 198 (2000) 179–189.
[59] D. Monti, P. Chetoni, S. Burgalassi, M. Najarro, M.F. Saettone, E. Boldrini, Effect of
different terpene-containing essential oils on permeation of estradiol through
hairless mouse skin, Int. J. Pharm. 237 (2002) 209–214.
[60] K. Cal, S. Janicki, M. Sznitowska, In vitro studies on penetration of terpenes from
matrix-type transdermal systems through human skin, Int. J. Pharm. 224 (2001)
81–88.
[61] P.A. Cornwell, B.W. Barry, J.A. Bouwstra, G.S. Gooris, Modes of action of terpene
penetration enhancers in human skin; differential scanning calorimetry,
small-angle X-ray diffraction and enhancer uptake studies, Int. J. Pharm 127
(1996) 9–26.
[62] A. Kato, Y. Ishibashi, Y. Miyake, Effect of egg-yolk lecithin on transdermal delivery
of bunazosin hydrochloride, J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 39 (1987) 399–400.
[63] B.W. Barry, Lipid–protein-partititioning theory of skin penetration enhancement,
J. Control. Release 15 (1991) 237–248.
A.C. Williams, B.W. Barry / Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 64 (2012) 128–137 137